Andreas Antonopoulos on Bitcoin | Maker Faire 2014

Bitcoin is internet of money. I think I want to talk about bitcoin from the perspective of the misfits, the freaks, people who refused to think the way everybody else think, the people who see a half working elegant technology, and don't look at the half-working, they look at the elegent side, they recognize innovation, and they recognize innovation not a few month or a few years before others, but sometimes a decade before others recognize the innovation. That's going to be the people who make first, and that's a great place to start talking bitcoin.

Bitcoin is unexpected, bitcoin is not money as we know it, bitcoin should not have happened, bitcoin really has not possibility of success. It can not possibly work. It's one of those thinks that will not work in theory, but it works in practice. Like wikipedia, like Linux, like the internet. ... really trusts... And bitcoin succeed because it works because it's a technology , I want to talk about that spirit of the misfit, working into a industry, and saying you don't worry about the change ever, and being laugh out the rule, and keeping on and going on until the fact that they change everything.

And this happens to technology all the time, we just forget about this, we ignore it we rewrite the history ... this video we just watched about auto mobile. You know what wikipedia said about the old auto mobile. They reicule car, they locked cars. Cars were slower than horses, cars locked down all the time, cars need expensice gas you can not find anywhere, and they required enomerous infrastructure to work.